    +-------------------------------------------+
    +                 mathastext                +
    +                                           +
    +      `Use the text font in math mode'     +
    +             v1.15f 2012/10/24             +
    +             2589111+jfbu@users.noreply.github.com             +
    +-------------------------------------------+


                    INTRODUCTION

Optimal typographical results for documents containing
mathematical symbols can only be hoped for with math fonts
specifically designed to match a given text typeface.
Although the list of freely available math fonts (alongside
the Computer Modern and AMS extension fonts) is slowly
expanding (fourier, kpfonts, mathdesign, pxfonts, txfonts,
and others...) it remains limited, and the situation is even
worse with Unicode fonts (XeTeX/LuaTeX). So if you can't
find a math font which fits well with your favorite text
font, and wish to still be able to typeset mathematical
documents, perhaps not of the highest typographical quality,
but at least not subjected to obvious visual incompatibi-
-lities between your text font and the math fonts,
try out mathastext: it will simply use the text font also
for the math!


                        USAGE

main options: italic, subdued, defaultmathsizes, LGRgreek.

          \usepackage[options]{mathastext}
          after other font related packages.

          The document will then use the text
          font also in math mode (letters,
          digits, punctuation and a a few other
          ascii characters).      

          Optionally load further font packages
          and then make use of the
          \Mathastext[version_name] command to
          define math versions in the preamble
          and use them in the document body with
          the \MTversion{version_name} command.

          With the subdued option, mathastext is
          only active inside such a defined math
          version. 

Use the `italic' option to get the Latin letters in math
mode be in italics. Digits and log-like operator names
(pre-defined as well as user-defined) will be in the same
shape as the text font (usually this means upright).

For documents needing Greek letters the following is
possible:
    + no option: Greek letters defined by other packages,
    + eulergreek: use the Euler font for the Greek letters,
    + symbolgreek: use the Postscript Symbol font for the
      Greek letters.
    + LGRgreek: use the document text font in LGR encoding
      Further options specify the shape of the lowercase
      and uppercase Greek glyphs; starting with v1.15c it is
	  possible to use multiple distinct LGR fonts in the
	  same document. 

Commands are provided to scale the Euler and Symbol fonts by
an arbitrary factor to let them fit better with the document
text font. 

Read the PDF documentation for more.

Examples available there:
     mathsastext.html
     showcase.html

                    INSTALLATION

Run latex on mathastext.ins to create mathastext.sty from
mathastext.dtx and put mathastext.sty where LaTeX can find
it. To generate documentation, including the commented
source code, run latex on mathastext.dtx


CHANGE LOG

1.15f [2012/10/25]

   *  \$, \#, \&, and \% had been re-defined by mathastext since its
      inception in a rather strange (but working) way, which
      could cause surprises to other packages. Fixed.

   *  The subdued mechanism for the math alphabets is implemented
      in a simpler and more efficient manner than in 1.15e.

   *  The `defaultxx' options act a bit differently, and are more
      useful in case of a `too many math alphabets' situation.

   *  Various improvements in the documentation.

   *  General clean up and better commenting of the source code.


1.15e [2012/10/22]

   *  New user commands to specify skip or glue to be
      inserted after the math symbols \exists and \forall

   *  Complete (user transparent) rewrite of the code
      implementing the subdued option; and its action has
      been extended to apply also to the \mathbf, \mathit,
      \mathsf, \mathtt alphabets and not only to \mathrm and
      \mathnormal as in the previous versions.

   *  Improvements in the documentation.


1.15d [2012/10/13]

   *  The Unicode situation is now correctly treated,
      throughout the code (this had been left in a half-done
      way from version 1.14 of April 2011). 

        - this includes an issue related to amsmath and its
      DeclareMathOperator macro which has been fixed,

        - and the code related to \relbar and \Relbar (and
      \models) has been revised.

1.15c [2012/10/05]

   *  It is now possible to use distinct fonts in LGR encoding
      for the Greek letters according to the current math
      version. 

   *  Improvements to the documentation.

1.15b

   *  Corrected a `feature' of 1.15 which was backward-
      incompatible

   *  Improvements to the pdf documentation

1.15  [2012/09/26]

   *  The subdued option allows the mathastextification to
      act only locally.  

   *  Some measures taken to deal with amsmath related
      issues when using xetex or luatex.

1.14c

   *  A bug is fixed: the \Mathastext macro reinitializes
      the fonts in the normal and bold math versions, but it
      also erroneously redeclared the math alphabet changing
      commands which could have been set up in previously
      defined math versions (via earlier calls to
      \Mathastext[version_name]).

1.14b [2011/04/03]

   *  there was a bug with \$, \#, \&, \% in math mode which
      showed up when ten or more math families had been
      declared. This bug affected also the minus sign under
      the same circumstances, when Unicode engines were
      used. Fixed.

   *  the options LGRgreek and selfGreek act now a bit
      differently, and new options LGRgreeks and selfGreeks
      have been defined. 

   +  I also cleaned up a bit the code, for a more
      structured namespace.

1.14

   *  mathastext now modifies also the math alphabets \mathit,
      \mathsf and \mathtt, thus making it a quite generic
      complete manner to adapt the math configuration to fonts
      provided with no math support.

1.13b

   *  when the Symbol font is used for \prod and \sum this 
      will be only for inline math; display math will use the
      default glyphs 

1.13 [2011/03/11]

   *  the LGRgreek option is added.

   *  internal changes for better readability of the code.


1.12

   *  various bugs have been corrected.

   *  the endash and alldelims options are active by default.

   *  the package is more Unicode aware.

   *  the \Mathastext command has been improved to
      facilitate the mechanism of math versions also when
      using XeTeX or LuaTeX (with package fontspec.) 

   *  the en-dash and dotless i and j now work with all
      encodings, Unicode inclusive.

1.11 [2011/02/06] New optional argument to \Mathastext macro.

1.1  [2011/02/01] options italic and frenchmath.

1.0  [2011/01/25]

Copyright (C) 2011, 2012 by Jean-Francois B..

	The files of this package may be distributed and/or modified
	under the conditions of the LaTeX Project Public License,
	either version 1.3 of this license or (at your option) any
	later version.

	The latest version of this license is in
	  http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt
	and version 1.3 or later is part of all distributions of
	LaTeX version 2003/12/01 or later.


