    +-------------------------------------------+
    +                mathastext                 +
    +                                           +
    + `Use the text font in simple mathematics' +
    +             v1.14 2011/03/22              +
    +             2589111+jfbu@users.noreply.github.com             +
    +-------------------------------------------+


                    INSTALLATION

Run latex on mathastext.ins to create mathastext.sty from
mathastext.dtx and put mathastext.sty where LaTeX can find
it. To generate documentation, including the commented
source code, run latex on mathastext.dtx


                        USAGE

main options: 
   italic, LGRgreek, eulergreek, symbolgreek, defaultmathsizes

          \usepackage[options]{mathastext}
          after other font related packages

The document will then use the main text font also in
mathematics mode. Use the `italic' option to have the Latin
letters in math mode be in italics. Digits and log-like
operator names (pre-defined as well as user-defined) will be
upright (if the text font is upright). So one can now
typeset documents (containing simple mathematics formulas)
with a quite arbitrary TeX text font, without worrying too
much that nobody ever designed accompanying math fonts.

For documents needing Greek letters the following is
possible:
    + use the default set-up at the time of loading the
      package (no option necessary),
    + LGRgreek: use the document text font in LGR encoding
      (further options specify the shape of the lowercase
      and uppercase Greek glyphs),  
    + eulergreek: use the Euler font for the Greek letters,
    + symbolgreek: use the Postscript Symbol font for the
      Greek letters.

Commands are provided to scale the Euler and Symbol fonts by
an arbitrary factor to let them fit better with the document
text font. 

Additionally mathastext provides a simple interface to use
different fonts in the same document, be it for math or text
(not that we recommend abusing it!).

Using mathastext without the `italic' option usually reduces
the size of the final PDF file. The option `symbolmax' will
get quite a few mathematical glyphs from the postscript
Symbol font included in all LaTeX distributions, so that for
documents with simple mathematics, the default math fonts
may be completely avoided. This sometimes leads to smaller
PDF files.

Read the PDF documentation for more.

Examples available at mathsastext.html

CHANGE LOG

1.14

   *  mathastext now modifies also the math alphabets \mathit,
      \mathsf and \mathtt, thus making it a quite generic
      complete manner to adapt the math configuration to fonts
      provided with no math support.

1.13b

   *  when the Symbol font is used for \prod and \sum this 
      will be only for inline math; display math will use the
      default glyphs 

1.13

   *  the LGRgreek option is added.

   *  internal changes for better readability of the code.


1.12

   *  various bugs have been corrected.

   *  the endash and alldelims options are active by default.

   *  the package is more Unicode aware.

   *  the \Mathastext command has been improved to
      facilitate the mechanism of math versions also when
      using XeTeX or LuaTeX (with package fontspec.) 

   *  the en-dash and dotless i and j now work with all
      encodings, Unicode inclusive.

Copyright (C) 2011 by Jean-Francois B..

	The files of this package may be distributed and/or modified
	under the conditions of the LaTeX Project Public License,
	either version 1.3 of this license or (at your option) any
	later version.

	The latest version of this license is in
	  http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt
	and version 1.3 or later is part of all distributions of
	LaTeX version 2003/12/01 or later.


